#separator:tab
#html:false
#notetype:Basic
#deck:Math::Rectangular coordinates
#tags:math precalculus rectangular-coordinates
#columns:Front	Back	Tags
#tags column:3
On a number line, one dimension, how many numbers locate a point, and what is the number called?	One. It is the coordinate of the point. In the plane a point needs two, its x-coordinate and its y-coordinate, and the pair (x, y) is called its coordinates.	definition
Is (x, y) one coordinate or two?	Two. A coordinate is one real number, one per axis: x is the x-coordinate and y is the y-coordinate. The pair (x, y) is the coordinates of the point, plural. A point on a line has one coordinate, a point in the plane two, a point in space three.	definition
How many numbers locate a point in a plane, and what are they called together?	Two, one coordinate per axis. Together they form an ordered pair (x, y), the coordinates of the point.	definition
In a rectangular coordinate system, what is the horizontal number line called?	The x-axis.	definition
In a rectangular coordinate system, what is the vertical number line called?	The y-axis.	definition
In the xy-plane, what is the origin O?	The point where the x-axis and the y-axis intersect: the point chosen as 0 on both axes, so its coordinates are (0, 0). On a number line the origin is the single point 0; in space it is (0, 0, 0). One 0 per axis.	definition
Is the origin a special point of the plane?	No. It is the point chosen as 0 when the axes were drawn. Move the axes and another point becomes the origin, and every coordinate changes with it; the points themselves and the distances between them do not.	definition
Must the x-axis and the y-axis use the same scale?	No. Mathematics usually uses the same scale on both; an application may use a different scale on each axis.	definition
Which points on the x-axis carry positive numbers, and which carry negative numbers?	Points to the right of O are positive; points to the left of O are negative.	definition
Which points on the y-axis carry positive numbers, and which carry negative numbers?	Points above O are positive; points below O are negative.	definition
What does the arrowhead at the end of an axis mean?	It marks the positive direction of that axis.	definition
What are the two names of the coordinate system built from two perpendicular number lines?	The rectangular coordinate system, also called the Cartesian coordinate system, after René Descartes.	definition
What is the xy-plane?	The plane in which the x-axis and the y-axis lie.	definition
What are the coordinate axes?	The x-axis and the y-axis.	definition
In the ordered pair (x, y) of a point P, what does x measure?	The signed distance of P from the y-axis: how far right or left P is.	signed-distance
In the ordered pair (x, y) of a point P, what does y measure?	The signed distance of P from the x-axis: how far up or down P is.	signed-distance
What does signed mean in the signed distance x?	x > 0 when P is to the right of the y-axis, and x < 0 when P is to the left of it.	signed-distance
The x-coordinate measures distance from which axis, the x-axis or the y-axis?	The y-axis. It measures right or left of the vertical line, and the vertical line is the y-axis.	signed-distance
What is the ordered pair (x, y) of a point P called?	The coordinates of P.	definition
How do you plot the point (−3, 1)?	Go 3 units along the x-axis to the left of O, then straight up 1 unit, and place a dot there.	plotting
What does it mean to plot a point?	To place a dot at the location in the plane given by its coordinates.	plotting
What are the coordinates of the origin in the plane, on a line, and in space?	(0, 0) in the plane, 0 on a line, (0, 0, 0) in space: one 0 per axis.	definition
What form do the coordinates of a point on the x-axis have?	(x, 0): the y-coordinate is 0.	axes
What form do the coordinates of a point on the y-axis have?	(0, y): the x-coordinate is 0.	axes
A point has y-coordinate 0. Where is it?	On the x-axis.	axes
A point has x-coordinate 0. Where is it?	On the y-axis.	axes
What is another name for the x-coordinate of a point?	The abscissa.	vocabulary
What is another name for the y-coordinate of a point?	The ordinate.	vocabulary
What is the abscissa of a point?	Its x-coordinate.	vocabulary
What is the ordinate of a point?	Its y-coordinate.	vocabulary
Where do the words abscissa and ordinate come from?	Latin, from the 1600s, before x and y were the standard letters. Abscissa means cut off: the piece of the axis from O to the foot of the perpendicular from the point. Ordinata means applied in order: that perpendicular itself. Leibniz used both and coined the word coordinates.	vocabulary
Is the abscissa the x-axis?	No. The abscissa is the number x of a point. The horizontal line is the x-axis, also called the axis of abscissas.	vocabulary
What are abscissa and ordinate called in Polish, French and German?	Polish odcięta and rzędna, French abscisse and ordonnée, German Abszisse and Ordinate. In those languages they are the only names for the two coordinates.	vocabulary
How is the point P whose coordinates are (x, y) usually written and said?	Written P = (x, y), and said simply the point (x, y).	vocabulary
What does Larson call the signed distance of a point from an axis?	The directed distance. Directed distance and signed distance are two names for one number: the coordinate, whose sign says which side of the axis the point is on.	vocabulary
What other names does the xy-plane go by?	The Cartesian plane, or the coordinate plane. Rectangular coordinate system and Cartesian coordinate system are likewise one thing: rectangular says the axes meet at right angles, Cartesian credits Descartes.	vocabulary
What is genuinely different from rectangular (Cartesian) coordinates?	Polar coordinates: the same point of the same plane named by its distance from the origin and its angle from the x-axis instead of by x and y. A different naming, not a different plane.	vocabulary
The notation (x, y) has two meanings. What are they?	A point in the plane, an ordered pair; or the open interval of all real numbers t with x < t < y. Only the context says which.	notation
Does a vector start at the origin?	Not necessarily. A vector is a displacement, such as 3 right and 1 up, and can be drawn from any starting point, its initial point or tail. Drawn from O its tip lands on the point (3, 1), which is why the point (3, 1) and the vector (3, 1) share a notation. The vector from P = (2, 3) to Q = (5, 4) is (5 − 2, 4 − 3) = (3, 1), the same vector.	notation
Can (5, 2) be an open interval?	No. An interval (a, b) needs a < b, and 5 < 2 fails, so that interval would be empty. (5, 2) can only be the point 5 right and 2 up.	notation
Must the coordinates of a point be whole numbers?	No. (−1.5, −2.5) is a point in quadrant III, and (√2, 1/3) is a point in quadrant I. The plane is every pair of real numbers; the grid lines are only a reading aid.	plotting
What are the quadrants?	The four regions into which the coordinate axes divide the xy-plane, numbered I to IV counterclockwise starting from the upper right.	quadrants
Signs of x and y in quadrant I?	x > 0 and y > 0 (upper right).	quadrants
Signs of x and y in quadrant II?	x < 0 and y > 0 (upper left).	quadrants
Signs of x and y in quadrant III?	x < 0 and y < 0 (lower left).	quadrants
Signs of x and y in quadrant IV?	x > 0 and y < 0 (lower right).	quadrants
A point has x < 0 and y > 0. Which quadrant?	Quadrant II.	quadrants
A point has x > 0 and y < 0. Which quadrant?	Quadrant IV.	quadrants
A point has x < 0 and y < 0. Which quadrant?	Quadrant III.	quadrants
A point has x > 0 and y > 0. Which quadrant?	Quadrant I.	quadrants
Which quadrant is a point on a coordinate axis in?	None. Points on the axes belong to no quadrant, because 0 is neither positive nor negative.	quadrants
Which quadrant is (3, −2) in?	Quadrant IV: x > 0 and y < 0.	quadrants
Which quadrant is (−2, −3) in?	Quadrant III: x < 0 and y < 0.	quadrants
Which quadrant is (−3, 1) in?	Quadrant II: x < 0 and y > 0.	quadrants
Which quadrant is (3, 2) in?	Quadrant I: x > 0 and y > 0.	quadrants
In which order are the quadrants numbered around the origin?	Counterclockwise: I upper right, II upper left, III lower left, IV lower right.	quadrants
Are (2, 5) and (5, 2) the same point?	No. An ordered pair remembers which entry is first: (2, 5) is 2 right and 5 up; (5, 2) is 5 right and 2 up.	ordered-pair
Why is a quadrant nothing but a pair of signs?	Membership depends only on whether x and y are positive or negative, never on their sizes: (1, 1) and (1000, 5) are both in quadrant I.	reasoning
What happens to the quadrant of (x, y) when x is replaced by −x?	The point reflects across the y-axis: quadrants I and II swap, and III and IV swap.	reasoning
In which quadrants is the product xy positive?	I and III, where x and y have the same sign. It is negative in II and IV.	reasoning
