#separator:tab
#html:false
#notetype:Basic
#deck:Math::Learning to learn::Studying vs learning
#tags:learning bloom
#columns:Front	Back	Tags
#tags column:3
Studying vs learning, in the dental student's words?	Studying focuses on the whats; learning focuses on the hows, whys and what ifs.	definition
Why does learning the hows and whys protect you from forgetting?	Forgotten whats can be re-created from them; forgotten whats learned alone are simply gone.	definition
Bloom's six levels, bottom to top?	Remembering, understanding, applying, analyzing, evaluating, creating.	bloom
Who revised Bloom's taxonomy in 2001?	Lorin Anderson and David Krathwohl.	bloom
Bloom level: state a^2 + b^2 = c^2.	Remembering.	bloom
Bloom level: use Pythagoras to find the height a ladder reaches.	Applying.	bloom
Bloom level: judge whether every right triangle with whole sides is a 3-4-5.	Evaluating (it is false: 5-12-13).	bloom
Bloom level: a formula that generates every Pythagorean triple.	Creating.	bloom
Euclid's formula for Pythagorean triples?	(m^2 - n^2, 2mn, m^2 + n^2), for m > n > 0; primitive when m and n are coprime and not both odd.	pythagoras
McGuire's step 4 question?	At what Bloom level have I been operating, and at what level do I need to operate now?	bloom
Why work harder to teach the class than to get an A?	A class can ask anything, so you need the whys; a test asks only its questions.	trap
Pam Ball on cramming?	It is renting the information for the test; right after the test it is repossessed.	trap
Bloom's original 1956 levels, bottom to top?	Knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis, evaluation.	bloom
What did the 2001 revision change at the top of Bloom's pyramid?	Creating (the old synthesis) moved above evaluating, and the levels became verbs.	bloom
Without explaining the material to anyone, when do you discover you did not understand it?	On the test.	trap
Who can you teach if you have no class?	Empty chairs, stuffed animals, a coat rack, friends, family or pets.	definition
